doc: net: Updates to network architecture document (#13714)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/guides/networking/net-stack-architecture.rst

.. _network_stack_architecture:

Network Stack Architecture
##########################

High level overview of the network stack
****************************************

.. figure:: zephyr_netstack_overview.svg

>     :align: left

Reviewer: output looks weird, probably because of this align you have.

Author: Yes, I know. The idea was to place the image to one side and the text to other so that it is easier to understand the architecture in one glance. Unfortunately it seems to require some voodoo css coding that I do not know, so lets center the images then.

    :alt: Overview of the network stack architecture
    :figclass: align-center

    Network stack overview

*The network stack is layered and it consists of the following parts:*

> * **Network Application.** The network application uses

Reviewer 2: > Now would be a good time to suggest any tweaks ...

Ok, I would suggest to change this too "The network application can either use provided application-level protocol libraries or access BSD Socket API directly."

  :ref:`BSD socket API <bsd_sockets_interface>` to create a network connection,
  send or receive data, and close a connection. The application can also use

>   the :ref:`network management API <net_mgmt_interface>` to set network

Reviewer 2: > to set network  related parameters

Suggested: "to configure network and set related parameters".

Kinda make more explicit that we offer both data-plane and control-plane APIs, and application has (or can have) full control of networking.

  related parameters such as taking network interface down, starting a scan
  (when applicable), setting IP address to a network interface, etc.

> * **Network Protocols.** This provides implementations for

Reviewer 2: Please split this in more bullet points:

* Application-level network protocols.
* BSD Socket API
* Network protocols

Each could have a sentence or two of description, and this describes layering more explicitly and understandably.

Author: I created bullet points but left out the BSD socket API as that is not a protocol.

Reviewer 2: > I created bullet points but left out the BSD socket API as that is not a protocol.

It's not a protocol, it's *layer*. These bullet points describe layers.

Author: We are talking about protocols here in this bullet, not layers. I will mention socket API in core network protocol bullet instead. Will send a new version shortly so you see what I mean.

Reviewer 2: > We are talking about protocols here in this bullet, not layers.

And what I suggested in the original comment, that some layers are not described, and instead of 1 bullet point, have 3. (Colloquially, "split in 3").

> I will mention socket API in core network protocol bullet instead. 

It's a separate layer on its own. Both paradigmatically and code-wise.

  various protocols such as IPv6, IPv4, UDP, TCP, ICMPv4 and ICMPv6.
  See :ref:`application protocols chapter <net_protocols>` for information
  about CoAP, LWM2M and MQTT.

* **Network Interface Abstraction.** This provides functionality
  that is common in all the network interfaces, such as setting network
  interface down, etc. There can be multiple network interfaces in the system.
  See :ref:`network interface overview <net_if_interface>` for more details.

* **L2 Network Technologies.** This provides common API for sending and
  receiving data to and from an actual network device.
  See :ref:`L2 overview <net_l2_interface>` for more details.
  These network technologies include :ref:`Ethernet <ethernet_interface>`,
  :ref:`IEEE 802.15.4 <ieee802154_interface>`, Bluetooth, CANBUS, etc.
  Some of these technologies support IPv6 header compression (6Lo), which is
  done in its own layer. For example ARP for IPv4 is done by the
  :ref:`Ethernet component <ethernet_interface>`.

> * **Network Device Driver.** The actual low-level device driver handles the

Reviewer 2: Suggested to use plural here (device driver**s**, etc.), to make it obvious that multiple devices are supported.

  physical sending or receiving of a network packet.

Network data flow
*****************

The application typically consists of one or more threads that execute
the application logic. When using the network connectivity APIs, following
things will happen.

.. figure:: zephyr_netstack_overview-rx_sequence.svg
    :align: left
    :alt: Network RX data flow
    :figclass: align-center

    Network RX data flow

*Data receiving (RX):*

1. A network data packet is received by a device driver.

2. The device driver allocates enough network buffers to store the received
   data. The network packet is placed to proper RX queue (implemented by
   k_fifo). By default there is only one receive queue in the system,

>    but it is possible to have max. 8 receive queues. These queues will

Reviewer 2: > max.

Dot is not needed here. If in doubt, just write "maximum".

   process incoming packets with different priority.
   See :ref:`traffic-class-support` for more details. The receive queues also

>    acts as a way to separate the data processing pipeline (bottom-half) as

Reviewer 2: > acts

Typo, should be "act" (because "queues" are plural).

   the device driver is running in interrupt context and it must do its
   processing as fast as possible.

3. The network packet is then passed to correct L2 driver. The L2 driver can

>    check if the packet is proper and modify it if needed.

Reviewer 2: On its own, it's unclear why would L2 "modify" packet. Suggested to say:

... and modify it if needed, e.g. strip L2 header and frame check sequence, etc.

> 4. The packet goes through network interface. There network statistics are

Reviewer 2: There multiple tweaks I could suggest to this doc, but leave for later. But can't pass beyond this one. Can we please say "The packet is processed by a network interface." Because "goes thru" is ambiguous.

Author: Now would be a good time to suggest any tweaks you have, we can then discuss about them here. I can certainly change the wording about network interface.

   collected if enabled by :option:`CONFIG_NET_STATISTICS`.

5. The packet is then passed to L3 processing. If the packet is IP based,
   then the L3 layer checks if the packet is a proper IPv6 or IPv4 packet.

> 6. The packet is then checked by a socket handler and placed to a socket queue

Reviewer 2: I'd make this more explicit and understandable: "A socket handler then finds an active socket to which packet belongs and puts it in a queue for that socket, ...". Perhaps reword a bit, but make it explicit what "checked by a socket handler" means, and the fact that socket queue is per-socket.

.. _network_stack_architecture:

Network Stack Architecture
##########################

High level overview of the network stack
****************************************

.. figure:: zephyr_netstack_overview.svg
    :align: left
    :alt: Overview of the network stack architecture
    :figclass: align-center

    Network stack overview

> *The network stack is layered and it consists of the following parts:*

Reviewer: This should not be italic IMO. To make all of this look better I would have a few paragraphs here with some kind of executive summary, right now we jump into the bulleted details without any introduction and it does not look good.

Author: > This should not be italic IMO

Yeah, we can put what ever style here. There are endless possibilities to tweak this document. Lets see David's comments first, and I will send new version.

I try to come up some summary text here for executives, I just expect that no executive will be reading this document.

Reviewer 2: > summary text here for executives

;-) I'm sure @nashif meant a different thing. I would reply that executive summary is in bolded titles of bullet points. But I'm still saddened that my good suggestion to described *each* layer of the stack clearly wasn't taken, so I don't.

Author: There is already a overview document that describes in bulleted list things about network stack. I will try to come up some introduction chapter here for architecture doc.

Reviewer: > I try to come up some summary text here for executives, I just expect that no executive will be reading this document.

i mean an introduction in general terms about the overall architecture, not for executives and managers. Jumping into bullets directly does not look nice.

Author: Yeah, I understood that :)

  application-level protocol libraries or access BSD Socket API directly
  :ref:`BSD socket API <bsd_sockets_interface>` to create a network connection,
  send or receive data, and close a connection. The application can also use
  the :ref:`network management API <net_mgmt_interface>` to configure network
  and set related parameters such as taking network interface down,
  starting a scan (when applicable), setting IP address to a network interface,
  etc.

* **Network Protocols.** This provides implementations for
  various protocols such as

  * Application level network protocols like CoAP, LWM2M and MQTT.
    See :ref:`application protocols chapter <net_protocols>` for information
    about them.
  * Core network protocols like IPv6, IPv4, UDP, TCP, ICMPv4 and ICMPv6.
    You access these protocols by using
    :ref:`BSD socket API <bsd_sockets_interface>`.

* **Network Interface Abstraction.** This provides functionality
  that is common in all the network interfaces, such as setting network
  interface down, etc. There can be multiple network interfaces in the system.
  See :ref:`network interface overview <net_if_interface>` for more details.

> * **L2 Network Technologies.** This provides common API for sending and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **L2 Network Technologies.** This provides a common API for sending and
```

  receiving data to and from an actual network device.
  See :ref:`L2 overview <net_l2_interface>` for more details.
  These network technologies include :ref:`Ethernet <ethernet_interface>`,
  :ref:`IEEE 802.15.4 <ieee802154_interface>`, Bluetooth, CANBUS, etc.
  Some of these technologies support IPv6 header compression (6Lo), which is
  done in its own layer. For example ARP for IPv4 is done by the
  :ref:`Ethernet component <ethernet_interface>`.

* **Network Device Drivers.** The actual low-level device drivers handle the
  physical sending or receiving of network packets.

.. figure:: intentional-separator-image.png
    :align: center
    :width: 100%

Network data flow
*****************

> The application typically consists of one or more threads that execute

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An application typically consists of one or more threads that execute
```

> the application logic. When using the network connectivity APIs, following

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the application logic. When using the network connectivity APIs, the following
```

things will happen.

.. figure:: intentional-separator-image.png
    :align: center
    :width: 100%

.. figure:: zephyr_netstack_overview-rx_sequence.svg
    :align: left
    :alt: Network RX data flow
    :figclass: align-center

    Network RX data flow

Data receiving (RX)
-------------------

1. A network data packet is received by a device driver.

2. The device driver allocates enough network buffers to store the received

>    data. The network packet is placed to proper RX queue (implemented by

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   data. The network packet is placed in the proper RX queue (implemented by
```

   k_fifo). By default there is only one receive queue in the system,

>    but it is possible to have maximum 8 receive queues. These queues will

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   but it is possible to have up to 8 receive queues. These queues will
```

   process incoming packets with different priority.
   See :ref:`traffic-class-support` for more details. The receive queues also
   act as a way to separate the data processing pipeline (bottom-half) as

>    the device driver is running in interrupt context and it must do its

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   the device driver is running in an interrupt context and it must do its
```

   processing as fast as possible.

> 3. The network packet is then passed to correct L2 driver. The L2 driver can

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. The network packet is then passed to the correct L2 driver. The L2 driver can
```

   check if the packet is proper and modify it if needed, e.g. strip L2 header
   and frame check sequence, etc.

4. The packet is processed by a network interface. The network statistics are
   collected if enabled by :option:`CONFIG_NET_STATISTICS`.

5. The packet is then passed to L3 processing. If the packet is IP based,
   then the L3 layer checks if the packet is a proper IPv6 or IPv4 packet.

> 6. A socket handler then finds an active socket to which a network packet

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
6. A socket handler then finds an active socket to which the network packet
```

   belongs and puts it in a queue for that socket, in order to separate the
   networking code from the application. Typically the application is run in
   userspace context and the network stack is run in kernel context.

7. The application will then receive the data and can process it as needed.
   The application should have used the
   :ref:`network connectivity API <networking_api_usage>` to create a socket
   that will receive the data.

.. figure:: intentional-separator-image.png
    :align: center
    :width: 100%

.. figure:: zephyr_netstack_overview-tx_sequence.svg
    :align: left
    :alt: Network TX data flow
    :figclass: align-center

    Network TX data flow

Data sending (TX)
-----------------

1. The application should use the
   :ref:`network connectivity API <networking_api_usage>` when sending
   the data.

> 2. The application data prepared to be sent to kernel space and then copied to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. The application data is prepared for sending to kernel space and then copied to
```

   internal net_buf structures.

> 3. Depending on the socket type, protocol header is added in front of the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Depending on the socket type, a protocol header is added in front of the
```

>    data. For example, if the socket is UDP socket, then UDP header is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   data. For example, if the socket is a UDP socket, then a UDP header is
```

   constructed and placed in front of the data.

> 4. IP header is added to the network packet for UDP or TCP packet.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. An IP header is added to the network packet for a UDP or TCP packet.
```

5. The network stack will check that the network interface is properly set
   for the network packet, and also will make sure that the network interface
   is enabled before the data is queued to be sent.

> 6. The network packet is then classified and placed to proper transmit

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
6. The network packet is then classified and placed to the proper transmit
```

   queue (implemented by k_fifo). By default there is only one transmit queue

>    in the system, but it is possible to have maximum 8 transmit queues.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   in the system, but it is possible to have up to 8 transmit queues.
```

   These queues will process the sent packets with different priority.
   See :ref:`traffic-class-support` for more details.
   After the transmit packet classification, the packet is checked by the
   correct L2 layer module. The L2 module will do additional checks for the
   data and it will also create any L2 headers for the network packet.

>    If everything is ok, the data is given to network device driver to be sent

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   If everything is ok, the data is given to the network device driver to be sent
```

   out.

> 7. Device driver will send the packet to the network.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
7. The device driver will send the packet to the network.
```

.. figure:: intentional-separator-image.png
    :align: center
    :width: 100%

> Note that both in TX and RX data paths, the queues (k_fifo's) form a separation

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that in both the TX and RX data paths, the queues (k_fifo's) form separation
```

points where data is passed from one thread to another. These threads might

> run in different context (kernel / userspace) and with different priorities.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
run in different contexts (kernel vs. userspace) and with different priorities.
```
